Morgan Changarai:
My colleague and of course as soon as I arrived to agitated and immediately asked me to lie down instead of beating me. So you laid down and they beat you yes that is a fact. And for anyone to try to make an excuse for types of brutality and assault on me on behalf of the police or even to imply that the police were where we provoked it would be scandalous.  Tsepiso Makwetla:
Just very quicklyMr. Cheney you why what's the way forward for the opposition some people are saying you have absolutely no impact on what's happening in Zimbabwe. Yes you are organizing demonstrations and protests but in terms of pushing forward the political agenda you really have little teeth. What's your response to that.  Morgan Changarai:
Well that is that is totally unjustified criticism. Let me say that if the MDC had not taken the initiative to take the leadership in setting the agenda why would the why I would have the SADC have an extraordinary meeting on the crisis in Zimbabwe. If we had no impact. Why would Mugabe embark on a clampdown on the opposition in a brutal way that where he is done.  Morgan Changarai:
If the MDC had not had no impact.  Morgan Changarai:
You yourself are split.....Ah Let well Well this clearly is another matter but I'm just trying to put you the Fed to understand that if the MDC had no impact. Why would anyone bother about it. I'm just saying that the MDC is the voice of the people. It is the guardianship of the hopes and aspirations of the majority those we we we command the majority of Zimbabweans. Yes we may not have gone on this street because of the reality of the brutal response that everyone is aware of and that the fear is endemic in Zimbabwe but that doesn't mean that the MDC is not heading back. Now let's let's also examine the question of this split in its proper context. There is a perspective that this split should not occour at that it was cause or in political terms. There was a split in the ANC and PAC there was a split in the nationalist movement in Zimbabwe between ZANU and ZAPU but did that stop the people from championing their cause of of of of achieving independence.  Tsepiso Makwetla:
On that note thank you very much. Chan you right then sir Morgan on your I speed of the Movement for Democratic Change in Zimbabwe.  Water is a precious and costly resource that's vital for all life. Did you know that many South Africans are without water because others are wasting it wasting water is a public offense this year make a pledge to give back to the country by using your water wisely report all leaks and burst pipes to the Department of Water Affairs and forestry on 0 800 200 200 while at it remember to inquire about water saving tips.  This message is brought to you by the Department of Water Affairs and forestry on the 21st of January 1999 I had to go to the hospital to have my tonsils removed and my whole body was so I couldn't move I couldn't eat make something of my tonsils so the next day right before they start the operation I see this huge needle now.  I'm scared of needles did I tell you that that's where I just pass on avoid the long lines and the hassles by paying your TV licence online visit w w w dot tv l I see that SEO dot that a anytime pay your TV licence it's the right thing to do.  Tsepiso Makwetla:
Twenty six minutes past data on SFM a quick look at health issues before we go to the news headlines.  African ministers of health have declared their commitment to strengthen the continent's health systems. Ministers attending the third ordinary session of the African Union conference in Sundton Johannesburg this week have called on all stakeholders private sectors and NGO is to help them achieve their long term goals increasing health resources is also on the implementation list.  Ayanda Yeni:
Ayanda Yeni has more in the beginning of the conference. The main objective of African Ministers of Health was to find a possible solutions and strategy to the many challenges facing the African continent. African countries are well aware that they are at risk of not achieving the continent's Millennium Development Goals and curbing diseases poverty and socio economic issues by 2015 guided by the theme strengthening of health systems for equity and development. The ministers engage in much discussion. The impact of diseases such as malaria HIV AIDS and TB is hampering Africa's progress. Earlier this week ministers attending the conference were of the opinion that access to essential medicine was a problem due to the High Dependency level on the importation of pharmaceutical products.  Shirler Ditlou:
But then as health minister sherler Ditlou led in on to human resources for health that is really major cahallenge for Africa. We have about 25 percent of the global disease burden but only 3 percent of the required health human resource is you know suffering from brain drain. Both intercontinetal into and outside. You within countries themselves and so we were mandated to look at hostage human resource for health plans to really be able to address our human resource crisis.  Ayanda Yeni:
Among its challenges Africa a critical shortage of a health workforce and the weak capacity of training institutions inadequate infrastructure contributes to the shortage and the official opening. Deputy president Phumzile Mlambo Nqcuka said Africa should draw strength from a high number of youth not forgetting the importance of women who could bring about change.  Phumzile Mlambo Nqcuka:
Every delivery to focus again on how we go to delivering results of all continents close to women in the best interest of the continent. I want today to dream of a continent that is AIDS free generation in Africa. In our lifetime that free of HIV AIDS is quite different.  Ayanda Yeni:
We did achieve it according to a report commissioned by the Health Minister's disease burdens differ from country to country and they continue to grow because health systems are too weak. People are not empowered to improve their health and environmental factors among others. Zimbabwean Health Minister David Parvin Nyatwa says besides HIV AIDS his country is also facing challenges of the death of pregnant mothers. He says Zimbabwe is doing its best to fight malaria and TB. On the other hand Togo is battling to keep its citizens free of yellow fever by immunizing and educating them. African health ministers have set out a list of recommendations such as governments to develop deployment plans which would include revised incentive packages ensure that health workers being trained are using public funds and offer compulsory community service. The involvement of the community is also among its list of priorities. Parvin Natalya says he is optimistic that their strategies will succeed.  Parvin Nyatwa:
I hope with all the goodwill and determination that my public health ministers from other countries will take these recommendations and try to apply them to their own concrete situation at home. This is exactly what we're going to do in Zimbabwe. We took this recommendation.  Parvin Nyatwa:
I will also give them to my Cabinet colleagues in Zimbabwe and say this is how we want to go into health and it will strengthen our own strategies that we already have on the ground a collective approach is the message that are sent out to the conference AU social affairs commissioner Beyonce Kawane says she can only hope that ministers will take the message home to its citizens.  Beyonce Kawane:
The major outcome document is the Africa strategy. That is why we say it is owned by Africans. Africans have determined what their problems are and how they will resolve it. So what I'm saying in terms of the way forward is definitely what should happen if ministers have to go back and ensure that they implement the decisions and the commitments that they've made during this meeting.  Ayanda Yeni:
Upon request the next ordinary session will be held in Zimbabwe. Ministers from Africa have committed themselves to develop social protective systems particularly for the poor and vulnerable group. They also pledged to implement the Africa Health Strategy in collaboration with the African Union private sectors and civil society organisations i am Ayanda Yeniin the SABC News in Johannesburg.  Otsile Saku:
A little after age 30 let's update your news headlines now with the list recapping on the morning's top stories.  Otsile Saku:
Leading industrial and developing nations meeting in Washington have called for urgent efforts to reach a world trade deal. Say a strong political leadership by major players is crucial to ending the deadlock after six years of talks. Yesterday's IMF meeting in Washington gathered finance officials from most major economic powers including the United States the European Union Japan Brazil India China and South Africa. Economic growth unemployment public transport housing development and crime have been highlighted by President Thabo Mbeki as priority areas both nationally and within the city of Johannesburg. President Thabo Mbeki Gauteng Premier Mbazima Shilowa and Johannesburg mayor Amos Masondo I've been talking to the residents of the city and surrounding areas about various issues in the Imbizo campaign. They were interviewed exclusively on say a former President Mbeki says growth nationally is still of utmost importance. An ANC councillor and SANCO executive member in the Western Cape has been gunned down in Gugulethu the killing Last night appears to be an assassination. Police at the scene say a 41 year old Mthetheleli Joka was walking home when he was fired at by people on foot. The area has been dogged by allegations of infighting within SANCO and finally two people have been arrested. A policeman injured and at least three cars damaged in what appears to have been a racially motivated confrontation in the upmarket suburb of Nolaten Ridge in Cape Town last night. Police had their hands full trying to separate a group of black and white neighbours. Some residents say a guest house in the area is selling alcohol and holding late night parties. Police in Minlatton Are investigating charges of assaults and malicious damage to property.  Otsile Saku:
It's often on its back to weaken the laws thank you very much.  Tsepiso Makwetla:
Really. Twenty seven minutes to 8:00 and time for the editors this morning and welcome from Tippi saw muck week that if you've just joined us our participants today.